The story begins in the Shire, where all the Hobbits reside. They live quite a comfortable life here, and this is an interesting place to start because Hobbits avoid adventures. On the night of Frodo’s cousins birthday, Bilbo Baggins, he gives Frodo this magical ring knowing that it has the power to turn the wearer invisible. Initially he is reluctant to do so, but in the end, is encouraged by Gandalf the wizard who suspects he knows of the Ring’s dark powers. Once Gandalf confirms this, he informs Frodo that he must take the ring away from the Shire as Sauron is currently rising again, and will be seeking the ring.

So Frodo and his three friends, Sam, Pippin, and Merry begin their adventure to destroy the ring. Along the way, Ringwraiths pursue them, servants of the dark lord who are also known as Black Riders. They meet a group of wandering elves who agree to help them by letting friends ahead of them know of their adventure so that they can assist in protecting them. After this, the hobbits get lost in the Old Forest and are attacked by a possessed willow tree. Their savior is an entity known as Tom Bombadil, who is known as the oldest creature in Middle-earth.

They finally make it to the first town, Bree, on their journey where they meet Aragorn, a Ranger who happens to be the heir to the throne of an ancient kingdom – the Men of Westernesse. During their time in Bree, Frodo attempts to keep things low key. Unfortunately, at one point during the night, Frodo slips and falls and the ring lands on his finger, turning him invisible and sending a signal to the Ringwraiths. That evening, Aragorn warns the hobbits not to sleep in their rooms and ends up saving their lives as the Ringwraiths show up to kill them. This will be the first time of many where Aragorn saves the lives of the hobbits throughout the series.

Before their arrival, Gandalf had left a letter at the Inn informing the hobbits to head to the city of Rivendell, the land of the elves. Aragorn agrees to travel with them and help protect them but along the way, they encounter the Black Riders again, and Frodo is wounded gravely. Due to the nature of the
weapon used by the Black Riders, Frodo succumbs to a dark infection. Aragorn worries that this injury may influence Frodo negatively, and they proceed with haste. Just outside of Rivendell, they encounter Glorfindel, the Elf-lord. Just before they arrive at Rivendell, they encounter the Black Riders once again and Frodo, riding Glorfindel’s horse, outruns them, and the Black Riders are swept away by a flood created by Elrond, the master of Rivendell.

After Elrond heals Frodo, there is a council formed to discuss the future of the ring and how best to proceed with its destruction. They then find out the only place that the ring can indeed be destroyed is the Cracks of Doom, in the volcano Orodruin where the ring was initially forged. Frodo accepts this arduous task, and a fellowship is formed to journey to Mordor where Orodruin is. They form an alliance which consists of Sam, Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, Gandalf, an Elf named Legolas, a Dwarf named Gimli, and a Man from the South named Boromir.

They depart Rivendell to head to the Misty Mountains, but unfortunately, their planned path is blocked by rock slides and snow. They are forced to divert through the Mines of Moria, an ancient realm of the dwarves. Here they encounter Balrog, a demon, who attacks them which separates Gandalf from the group, as he and Balrog fall into a chasm together during battle.

They are forced to carry on without Gandalf, where they head to the forest of the Galadhrim Elves, Lórien. They encounter Lady Galadriel, who provides them with gifts to help them on their quest to Mordor. Frodo is strongly influenced by her power and wisdom and offers her the ring which she refuses – saying that the ring would only corrupt her.

After leaving Lórien, they travel by boat down the Great River of Anduin. That night the spot Gollum, the original owner of the ring before it had been lost to Bilbo Baggins, who has been following them. They eventually reach a split where they must decide whether to head directly to Mordor, or to the city of Minas Tirith in the opposite direction.

Boromir, having become overpowered by desire for the ring, attacks Frodo. Frodo manages to fend him off and decides that he alone must head directly to Mordor, abandoning the fellowship. Sam, however, notices his departure and follows him, so the two of them head off to Mordor together.

The novel is extremely well written and provides elaborate details of the scenery and actions the fellowship experience. The Fellowship of the Ring is the first novel in the series of the Fellowship’s journey to destroy the ring. The writing consistently provides grandiose explanations of the beauty of Middle-earth and a significant amount of suspense. It also consistently alludes to future hardships and problems they will encounter on the way, which will leave you aching for the next novel.
